Welcome back everyone.
In this lecture we're going to discuss group by the group by method it's allow us to group rows of data
together and call aggregate functions.
Often we want to explore how values are distributed or aggregated across groups.
To do this we use the group by method call on a pan this data frame.
If you're familiar of sequel or ask who all this is very very similar to a group by call.
This process is also often referred to as a split apply combine.
Let me show you step by step.
But a group by actually does behind the scenes.
Let's imagine that we have a data frame with two columns column 1 which is categorical A B or C and
then column 2 which is some continuous value what we do is we select a column of categorical values.
So that's step number one.
The column should be categorical set number two is it then split this up.
Based off this category.
So we get all the A's all the B's all the seas and so on.
Then we choose some sort of function to apply.
In this case we'll go ahead and apply a sum in which case we grab all the items in column two and we
go ahead and sum them together.
Per category.
So essentially split.
And then we've applied an aggregate function such as a summation.
After that we recombine everything together to get the final result which is why it's sometimes referred
to as a split.
Apply combine.
So this is what a group buy does.
We choose a categorical column split based off those categories apply the function per category and
then recombine it to get the final result so keep in mind we can choose any sort of aggregation function.
So the operation chosen with the group by call has to be an aggregation method.
So what does an aggregation method actually mean.
Well it means that we can take in multiple values and combine them to return a singular value.
So for example taking the sum of an array or a sum of many values returns back a single value.
Same with a standard deviation or a mean or just counting how many values there are can also take in
as many values as you want you count them up and you return back one single count things such as finding
the max or min are also aggregation functions since they take in many values and return back a single
result.
Let's go ahead and learn how to use Group II with pandas.
Here you have an empty Jupiter notebook.
Keep in mind we're actually going to be reading in a C as we file.
So after you've imported pandas as PD what you need to do is you have to make sure you locate the CSP
file.
So what I would suggest you do is inside the pandas Crash Course folder.
Go ahead and create a new notebook.
I've created one here called Untitled and inside of this folder pan this crash course there's a C as
we file called universities that CSP in order to call it the exact same way I'm going to call it.
We need to do is make sure your notebook is located in the exact same location as the start CSP file.
We're going to cover radiant data and a lot more detail later on.
But for right now to keep things simple underneath your pad this crash course folder.
Go ahead create a new notebook.
Label it untitled and make sure it's in the same directory as its universities that CSC file.
Once you've done that you should be able to run the following command.
DFA is equal to PD that read underscore C S V and then simply provide the name of that and what I suggest
you do is hit tab here and it should autocomplete for you.
So universities that CSC and then run that if it does not tab autocomplete it means your notebook is
in the wrong directory.
So please go back and watch carefully how I set this up.
What I can do is call ahead method on the state of free to show five rows by default.
Now here we have four columns sector university year completions and geography.
It looks like sector University geography and even here are actually categories.
So yea you can think of this as continuous but it's actually just categories such as the year 2016.
Next category year 2017 etc..
So don't be confused that even if a value in a column is not a string it can still be categorical or
treated as category.
So what we're going to do is step one which is called the group by method.
So Def group by and then we decide what column to actually want to group by.
So might be interesting to see the total completions per year across all universities.
So what this data set is actually showing us is the sector of university.
That particular university the year how many completions that particular university had all these universities
are actually located in Nevada.
So we're gonna do is let's go out and see how many completions are happening on average per year so
you can say good bye and then pass in the column.
Now if you just run this what happens is you get back this data frame group by object and what this
means is this group by object is waiting for some extra aggregation call.
So you end up doing is you can do something like Some and this will return back the total number of
completions across each year or maybe you're interested in the average number of completions such as
the mean you can run that.
And notice what happens is the year right here ends up being your index and the columns that can actually
be operated on.
So for example completions those end up being resulted here.
Now you may be wondering why don't I see sector or university or geography.
Well that's because it doesn't actually make sense to calculate the mean of these strings or the mean
of this university.
So keep that in mind that not every column is you're gonna be able to apply this aggregate function
to it.
And again typically what you do is you grouped by some sort of categorical column and then perform the
allegations expecting that to occur on the continuous value columns.
Now keep in mind this also just returns back a data frame and it can confirm that by checking the type
of this.
And here we can see the data frame so there are a lot of possible aggregate functions for you to use
such as Count some mean median etc. and I would encourage you to check out the notebook that we provide
for you in it.
If you actually open it up.
So if I go back here and open up my group by notebook you'll scroll down and eventually you'll see right
here all the other area functions.
You can call so I list them out here for you.
So you can check them out coming back to our notebook.
What I wanted to point out is if I call again maybe mean or let's go ahead and do some.
So we can see the total number of students going through year number completions per year.
It makes sense that it's getting bigger so more students populations grow et cetera.
It should probably be increasing by year.
What I could do is if I wanted the actual index to be in the other way essentially not ascending but
descending I could say here dot sort underscore index and then say ascending is equal to False run that
now actually sort based off the index.
OK so we can also group by multiple columns and that essentially gives us the SEC multi tiered index.
So let's take a look at our data frame again.
So here you have the sector the university that year what I could do is maybe group by the year and
then group by the sector.
So what I could do is something like this the F group by passing a list of what I want to group by.
So my outer grouping to be year and then my inner grouping to be by sector.
And then let's go ahead and check the sum so I can see the actual number of completions per year per
sector.
Keep in mind this data frame actually only has one column completions and now has a multi tiered index
or a multi hierarchy index or the outer index is year and the inner index is called sector.
So keep that in mind we won't really be dealing that much with multi tier indices throughout this course.
But if you perform a group by where you're calling multiple columns that will be the result.
Finally I want to show you how you can easily combine group by with The described method for a very
quick but useful summary statistics across a category.
So we can call the F group by year and then just say describe and recall describe returns back the actual
summary statistics across a variety of things like count mean standard deviation min max etc..
So here we get this nice table and again what happens here is now we actually have a multi tier across
our columns.
So we have this overall completions and then different columns like count mean standard deviation.
What I like to do however is call a transpose on this run that and this actually then makes the categories
or the year the columns themselves.
And then we can see this completions index.
So I personally prefer this method of calling that transpose after calling describe.
But the main thing I want to point out is not describe is very useful of group buy to quickly get some
aggregate summary statistics across particular categories in your dataset.
The main thing you should take away from this lecture is you called the F group by on some categorical
column and then call some sort of method to be done across the continuous values such as Max min or
if you want to run a gamut of summary statistics.
Then just call dot describe and for convenience you can always transpose this.
Thanks and I'll see you at the next lecture.